%<*driver>
\def\nameofplainTeX{plain}
\ifx\fmtname\nameofplainTeX
\input l3docstrip.tex
\preamble

========================================================================
 osgdoc tools - support for documentation

 (C) 2022-2026 Matthias Werner
 E-mail: matthias.werner@informatik.tu-chemnitz.de

 Released under the LaTeX Project Public License v1.3c or later
 See http://www.latex-project.org/lppl.txt
======================================================================== 

\endpreamble
\postamble
 This work is "maintained" (as per LPPL maintenance status) by
 Matthias Werner.
\endpostamble

\generate{
  \file{tagpax.sty}{\from{tagpax.dtx}{pkg}}
}
\expandafter\endbatchfile
\fi
%</driver>
%<*pkg>
\NeedsTeXFormat{LaTeX2e}[2024-11-01]
\ProvidesExplPackage{tagpax}
{2026/07/23}
{v0.8.5-dev}
{Native tagged PDF document import}
%</pkg>
%<*driver> 
\DocumentMetadata{}
\documentclass[
load-preamble+
]{osgdoc}

\usepackage[
  languages={de,en},
  map={de=german,en=english},
  targetlang={job=2},
  load babel
]{langselect}
\usepackage{microtype}
\usepackage{booktabs}
\usepackage{enumitem}

\newpackagename{\pdfpagespkg}{pdfpages}
\newpackagename{\tagpdfpkg}{tagpdf}
\newpackagename{\luatexname}{LuaTeX}
\newpackagename{\thepkg}{tagpax}

\newcommand{\luasig}[1]{\texttt{\detokenize{#1}}}
\newenvironment{luafunctions}
  {\begin{cnltxlist}}
  {\end{cnltxlist}}
\NewDocumentCommand\DescribeLuaFunction{m}
  {\item\luasig{#1}\hfill\newline}

\makeindex
\setcnltx{
  package     = tagpax,
  version  = \UseVersionOf{\packagename.sty},
  date     = \UseDateOf{\packagename.sty},  
  title       = {\ldeen{Das \pkg{tagpax}-Paket}{The \pkg{tagpax} package}},
  info        = {\ldeen{Semantischer Import getaggter PDF-Dokumente}{Semantic import of tagged PDF documents}},
  authors     = {Matthias Werner},
  abstract    = {\ldeen*{
    @1 ist ein experimentelles Lua\LaTeX-Paket zum Zusammenstellen vollständig
    getaggter PDF-Dokumente. Es übernimmt Seiten, logische Dokumentstruktur und
    Navigation in ein neues Masterdokument.

    Das Paket gehört zum \pkg*{osglecture}-Bundle, kann aber auch eigenständig
    genutzt werden. 
  }{
    @1 is an experimental Lua\LaTeX package for assembling fully tagged
    pdf documents. It imports pages, logical document structure and navigation
    into a new master document. 

    The package is part of the \pkg*{osglecture} bundle, but can also be used independently.
  }{\thepkg}
  },
  build-title
}

\begin{document}

\part{\ldeen{Benutzerhandbuch}{User manual}}

\section{\ldeen{Ziel und Anwendungsbereich}{Purpose and scope}}

\ldeen*{
  Es gibt häufig den Fall, dass fertige PDF-Dokumente in andere eingebaut werden, beispielsweise bei Proceedings 
  und Sammelbänden. Dafür hat sich \name{Andreas}{Matthias}' umfangreiches Paket \needpackage{pdfpages} bewährt.
  Um aus den eingebundenen Dokumenten PDF-Annotationen zu übernehmen, beispielsweise zur Erstellung von gemeinsamen
  Inhaltsverzeichnisen, kann zusätzlich \name{Ulrike}{Fischer}s \needpackage{newpax} oder dessen auf Java basierendes Vorgängerprojekt \needpackage{pax} von \name{Heiko}{Oberdiek} genutzt werden.

  Jedoch gibt es aus der Perspektive der Barrierefreiheit ein Problem: Auch wenn die eingebundenen Dokumente
  (über \cs{MetaDocumentdata}) korrekt getaggt sind, gehen diese Informationen beim Einbinden verloren.
  Dies war der Anstoß für die Schaffung von \thepkg, das die Möglichkeit gibt, Tagging-Informationen in
  das Gesamtdokument zu übernehmen.
}{
  It is often the case that finished PDF documents are embedded into others, for example in proceedings 
  and anthologies. \name{Andreas}{Matthias}’s comprehensive package \needpackage{pdfpages} has proven useful for this purpose.
  To extract PDF annotations from the embedded documents-—for example, to create combined
  tables of contents-—you can also use \name{Ulrike}{Fischer}’s \needpackage{newpax} or its Java-based predecessor project, \needpackage{pax}, by \name{Heiko}{Oberdiek}.

  However, there is a problem from an accessibility perspective: Even if the embedded documents
  are correctly tagged (via \cs{MetaDocumentdata}), this information is lost during embedding.
  This was the impetus for the creation of \thepkg, which allows tagging information to be
  incorporated into the overall document.
}

\medskip
\noindent
\colorbox{cnltxblue!20!white}{\parbox{\linewidth}{
\rule{\linewidth}{0pt}
  \begin{quote}
    \textbf{\ldeen{Achtung}{Note}!}\par
    \ldeen{
      Dieses Paket ist \textbf{kein} Ersatz für die oben genannten.
      Es ist (zumindest derzeit) nur auf den Anwendungsfall der Inkludierung von vollständigen,
      korrekt getaggten PDF-Dokumenten in der Originalreihenfolge der Seiten ausgelegt.
      Die vielfältigen Möglichkeiten zu weiteren Manipulation sind in \thepkg{} nicht möglich.
      }{
      This package is \textbf{not} a substitute for the ones mentioned above.
      It is (at least for now) designed only for the specific use case of including complete,
      correctly tagged PDF documents in their original page order.
      The various options for further manipulation are not available in \thepkg.
    }
  \end{quote}
  }
}
\medskip


\ldeen{Beim Einbinden eines Subdokuments wird seine äußere
  @1-Struktur entfernt; ihre Kinder werden im Master unter
  einem neuen @2 eingehängt. Vorhandene MCIDs bleiben dabei erhalten.
}{When a subdocument is embedded, its outer
  @1 structure is removed; its children are attached to the master under
  a new @2. Existing MCIDs are preserved in the process.
}{\code{Document}}{\code{Part}}

\section{\ldeen{Voraussetzungen}{Requirements}}

\ldeen*{
  Aktivieren Sie PDF-Management und automatisches Tagging vor der Dokumentklasse
  mit @1 sowohl in den Subdokumenten, als auch im Masterdokument.
}{
  Activate PDF management and automatic tagging before the document class with
  @1. 
}{\cs{DocumentMetadata}\Marg{tagging=on}}{\code{testphase}}

\begin{Verbatim}
%\DocumentMetadata{tagging=on,lang=de}
\documentclass{book}
\usepackage{tagpax}
\end{Verbatim}

\section{\ldeen{Schnellstart}{Quick start}}

\ldeen*{
  Extrahieren Sie zunächst die semantische Zwischenrepräsentation mit @1 und
  importieren Sie anschließend das vollständige Dokument mit @2.
}{
  First extract the semantic intermediate representation with @1 and then
  import the complete document with @2.
}{\cs{tagpaxextract}}{\cs{tagpaxinclude}}

\begin{Verbatim}
\tagpaxextract[paper.tagpax]{paper.pdf}
\tagpaxinclude[ir=paper.tagpax]{paper.pdf}
\end{Verbatim}


\subsection{\ldeen{Befehle}{Commands}}

\begin{commands}
  \command{tagpaxextract}[\oarg{\ldeen{Ausgabedatei}{output file}}\marg{PDF-Datei}]
  \ldeen*{
    Extrahiert die kanonische Zwischenrepräsentation aus @1. Ohne explizite
    @2 wird der Dateiname aus der PDF-Datei abgeleitet.
  }{
    Extracts the canonical intermediate representation from @1. If @2 is not
    given explicitly, the filename is derived from the PDF file.
  }{\meta{PDF-Datei}}{\meta{Ausgabedatei}}

  \command{tagpaxinclude}[\oarg{Optionen}\marg{PDF-Datei}]
  \ldeen*{
    Importiert @1 mit dem nativen linearen Importer. Mit @2 kann eine bereits
    erzeugte Zwischenrepräsentation angegeben werden.
  }{
    Imports @1 with the native linear importer. An existing intermediate
    representation can be selected with @2.
  }{\meta{PDF-Datei}}{\option{ir}}

  \command{tagpaxsetup}[\marg{Optionen}]
  \ldeen{Legt die globalen Import- und Navigationsoptionen fest.}
         {Sets global import and navigation options.}
\end{commands}

\ldeen*{
  Der native Importer erzeugt pro Quellseite ein frisches Form-XObject, setzt
  @1 vor dem Schreiben des Forms und rekonstruiert die Seitenstream-MCRs unter
  einem neuen @2. Explizite verschachtelte @3-Streams sind im gegenwärtigen MVP
  noch nicht importierbar.
}{
  The native importer creates a fresh Form XObject for every source page, sets
  @1 before the Form is written and reconstructs page-stream MCRs below a new
  @2. Explicit nested @3 streams are not yet importable by the current MVP.
}{\code{/StructParents}}{\code{Part}}{\code{/Stm}}

\section{\ldeen{Konfiguration}{Configuration}}

\begin{Verbatim}
\tagpaxsetup{
  heading-map = {H2=chapter,H3=section,H4=subsection},
  toc-depth = H4,
  bookmark-depth = H5
}
\end{Verbatim}

\ldeen*{
  @1 ordnet PDF-Überschriftenrollen den Ebenen des LaTeX-Inhaltsverzeichnisses
  zu. @2 und @3 legen die maximale Tiefe für sichtbares Inhaltsverzeichnis und
  PDF-Lesezeichen getrennt fest. Die Überschriftenrollen im importierten
  Strukturbaum werden nicht verändert.
}{
  @1 maps PDF heading roles to LaTeX table-of-contents levels. @2 and @3 set
  the maximum depth for the visible table of contents and PDF bookmarks
  independently. Heading roles in the imported structure tree are not changed.
}{\option{heading-map}}{\option{toc-depth}}{\option{bookmark-depth}}

\section{\ldeen{Optionale pdfpages-Kompatibilität}{Optional pdfpages compatibility}}

\ldeen*{
  Für eine schnelle Migration kann @1 die vertraute @2-Syntax bereitstellen.
  Unterstützt werden nur der lineare Vollimport mit @3 und @4. Die Option lädt
  @5 nicht; die eigentliche Form-Erzeugung übernimmt der native Importer.
}{
  For a quick migration, @1 can provide the familiar @2 syntax. It supports
  only linear full-document import with @3 and @4. The option does not load @5;
  actual Form creation remains the responsibility of the native importer.
}{\keyis{pdfpages}{true}}{\cs{includepdf}}{\keyis{pages}{-}}{\option{pagecommand}}{\pkg{pdfpages}}

\begin{Verbatim}
\usepackage[pdfpages]{tagpax}
\includepdf[
  pages=-,
  pagecommand={\thispagestyle{empty}}
]{paper.pdf}
\end{Verbatim}

\ldeen*{
  Aktivieren Sie diese Option nicht zusammen mit dem echten @1-Paket. Wenn @2
  dieses Paket erkennt, deaktiviert es seinen Kompatibilitätsbefehl und gibt
  eine Warnung aus. Verwenden Sie in einem solchen Dokument ausschließlich @3
  für semantische Importe.
}{
  Do not enable this option together with the real @1 package. If @2 detects
  that package, it disables its compatibility command and issues a warning.
  In such a document, use only @3 for semantic imports.
}{\pkg{pdfpages}}{\pkg{tagpax}}{\cs{tagpaxinclude}}

\ldeen*{
  Optionen wie @1, @2, @3, beliebige Seitenauswahlen und wiederholte Seiten
  werden abgelehnt, weil der erste stabile Anwendungsfall vollständige lineare
  Beiträge voraussetzt.
}{
  Options such as @1, @2, @3, arbitrary page selections and repeated pages are
  rejected because the first stable use case assumes complete linear
  contributions.
}{\option{nup}}{\option{booklet}}{\option{signature}}

\section{\ldeen{Entwicklungsstand}{Development status}}

\ldeen*{
  Der aktuelle Stand ist für Experimente mit selbst erzeugten, korrekt
  getaggten Dokumenten geeignet. Ein semantischer Roundtrip wird durch @1
  geprüft. Seitenstream-MCRs, Link-Annotationen und lokale Ziele werden
  rekonstruiert. Explizite verschachtelte Form-XObjects bleiben außerhalb des
  unterstützten Importprofils.
}{
  The current state is suitable for experiments with self-generated, correctly
  tagged documents. A semantic roundtrip is tested by @1. Page-stream MCRs,
  link annotations and local destinations are reconstructed. Explicit nested
  Form XObjects remain outside the supported import profile.
}{\code{l3build check -c roundtrip}}

\part{Developer manual}

\section{Architecture}

\pkg{tagpax} is organised as a semantic import platform rather than as a
\pdfpagespkg{} extension. Source semantics are read once by the inspector and
then passed through a canonical IR. The page writer reopens the PDF only for
page content and geometry; it does not rediscover structure or navigation.

\begin{center}
\begin{tabular}{@{}lll@{}}
\toprule
Layer & Input & Responsibility \\
\midrule
Inspector & PDF object graph & Normalise structure, streams, destinations and annotations \\
Canonical IR & Plain Lua tables & Stable semantic document graph \\
Transformations & Canonical IR & Unwrap \code{Document}, create contribution \code{Part}, navigation \\
Import plan & Transformed IR + bindings & Resolve source streams to target Forms \\
Backend plan & Import plan & Order PDF-writing operations \\
Backend & Backend plan & Emit Forms, StructElems, MCRs, OBJRs and ParentTree entries \\
\bottomrule
\end{tabular}
\end{center}

The architectural invariants are:
\begin{itemize}
  \item semantic decisions after inspection use the canonical IR;
  \item PDF object numbers are not semantic identifiers;
  \item MCIDs are retained and remain local to their content stream;
  \item transformations are separated from PDF-writing operations;
  \item the central LaTeX tagging backend remains the sole owner of the ParentTree.
\end{itemize}

\section{Lua API}

The Lua modules form a supported developer interface. Functions documented in
this section operate on plain Lua tables and do not require TeX unless stated
otherwise. Callers should treat undocumented fields as private.

\subsection{Inspector: \code{tagpax-inspect}}
\begin{luafunctions}
  \DescribeLuaFunction{inspect.from_pdf(filename, output?)}
    Reads a tagged PDF with LuaTeX's \code{pdfe} library, normalises it and
    returns canonical IR. If \code{output} is supplied, the canonical
    serialisation is written as well.
  \DescribeLuaFunction{inspect.from_file(filename)}
    Reads a serialised \code{.tagpax} file.
  \DescribeLuaFunction{inspect.summary(ir)}
    Returns stable summary values for diagnostics and tests.
\end{luafunctions}

\subsection{IR module: \code{tagpax-ir}}
\begin{luafunctions}
  \DescribeLuaFunction{ir.new()} Creates an empty canonical IR value.
  \DescribeLuaFunction{ir.read(filename)} Parses canonical line-oriented serialisation.
  \DescribeLuaFunction{ir.count_nodes(ir)} Returns the number of structure nodes.
\end{luafunctions}

\subsection{Validation: \code{tagpax-validate}}
\begin{luafunctions}
  \DescribeLuaFunction{validate.validate(ir)}
    Checks referential integrity, stream bindings, root nodes, child order and
    heading references. On failure, \code{errors} is an ordered list.
\end{luafunctions}

\subsection{Import planning: \code{tagpax-import}}
\begin{luafunctions}
  \DescribeLuaFunction{import.plan(ir, bindings, options?)}
    Converts semantic IR into a backend-independent import plan. Page streams
    use \code{bindings.pages[page]}; explicit streams use
    \code{bindings.streams[id]}.
  \DescribeLuaFunction{import.assert_resolved(plan)}
    Reports unresolved stream bindings. Explicit \code{/Stm} bindings are never
    redirected silently to a page Form.
\end{luafunctions}

\subsection{LuaTeX importer: \code{tagpax-luatex}}
\begin{luafunctions}
  \DescribeLuaFunction{luatex.write_page(filename, page, structparents, stream_id, max_width?, max_height?)}
    Writes one source page as a fresh Form XObject, adds
    \code{/StructParents}, and reports its target object reference.
  \DescribeLuaFunction{luatex.page_geometry(filename, page, max_width?, max_height?)}
    Returns the shared crop, scale and rotation transformation used for the
    page Form, destination coordinates and annotation rectangles.
\end{luafunctions}

\subsection{Native importer: \code{tagpax-native}}
\begin{luafunctions}
  \DescribeLuaFunction{native.emit_page_imports(pdf, irfile)}
    Emits one controlled page import operation per source page. This function
    is TeX-facing and requires LuaTeX.
\end{luafunctions}

\subsection{Backend prototype: \code{tagpax-backend}}
\begin{luafunctions}
  \DescribeLuaFunction{backend.emit_reservations(filename)}
    Reserves explicit-parent StructElems and source-ordered MCR/OBJR kid slots
    before page objects exist.
  \DescribeLuaFunction{backend.emit_bindings(filename)}
    Registers the MCID bindings and commits external ParentTree arrays after
    pages and annotations have supplied their target object references.
\end{luafunctions}

\section{Canonical intermediate representation}

The IR is the normative semantic API. A \code{.tagpax} file is its canonical
transport serialisation. IR version 1 contains source metadata, streams,
structure nodes, ordered child relations, roots, headings, destinations and
supported link annotations.

\begin{center}
\begin{tabular}{@{}llp{.52\linewidth}@{}}
\toprule
Record & Required fields & Meaning \\
\midrule
\code{source}  & \code{file}, \code{pages} & source-document identity \\
\code{stream}  & \code{id}, \code{kind} & page or explicit object stream \\
\code{node}    & \code{id}, \code{role} & structure element \\
\code{kid}     & \code{parent}, \code{index}, \code{kind} & ordered child relation \\
\code{heading} & \code{node}, \code{role}, \code{page}, \code{text} & navigation data \\
\code{destination} & \code{id}, \code{page}, \code{view} & named target and view parameters \\
\code{annotation} & \code{id}, \code{page}, \code{action}, \code{rect} & link geometry and action data \\
\code{root}    & \code{index}, \code{node} & root ordering \\
\bottomrule
\end{tabular}
\end{center}

\section{Backend contract}

The backend first reserves all structure elements and source-ordered kid slots.
It then writes Form XObjects and annotation overlays, binding their late PDF
object references into the reserved slots. Finally it commits the MCR and
annotation mappings to the central ParentTree. This three-phase order is
necessary because LuaTeX allocates Form and annotation objects during page
construction, but appending children only at that time would lose the source
\code{/K} order. Imported annotations receive \code{/StructParent} and
\code{/OBJR} entries owned by their original imported \code{Link} element;
tagpdf's automatic replacement-Link mechanism is suppressed for these overlays.
The bridge must not mutate the global \tagpdfpkg{} structure stack.

\section{Maintainer documentation}

The maintained design documentation lives next to the sources:
\code{doc/architecture.md} describes ownership and data flow,
\code{doc/DESIGN.md} records the reasons for current design choices, and
\code{doc/FORMATS.md} specifies the IR, import plan and private TeX backend
protocol. \code{doc/PDF-MODEL.md} explains the PDF objects, tagging relations
and coordinate systems on which those contracts rely. These documents describe
the current contract; obsolete proposals and superseded decision logs are
intentionally not retained.

\section{Implementation}

The implementation listings are generated with \pkg{osgdoc}'s
\cs{AutoDocInput}; source comments and code can therefore be interleaved
without explicit \code{macrocode} environments.

\subsection{Package}
\AutoDocInput{tagpax.dtx}{package}
\subsection{Experimental \tagpdfpkg{} bridge}
\AutoDocInput{tagpax.dtx}{tagpdf-bridge}

\end{document}
%</driver>
% \fi
%
%<*package>
\RequirePackage{tagpax-tagpdf-bridge}
\ExplSyntaxOn
\bool_new:N \g__tagpax_pdfpages_compat_bool
\keys_define:nn {tagpax/package}
  {
    pdfpages .bool_gset:N = \g__tagpax_pdfpages_compat_bool,
    pdfpages .default:n = true,
  }
\ProcessKeyOptions[tagpax/package]
\msg_new:nnn {tagpax}{luatex-required}{tagpax~currently~requires~LuaLaTeX.}
\msg_new:nnn {tagpax}{metadata-required}{Activate~PDF~management/tagging~with~\string\DocumentMetadata{tagging=on}.}
\msg_new:nnn {tagpax}{backend-missing}{External-MCR~backend~not~installed;~navigation~is~generated,~structure~attachment~is~not~yet~written.}
\sys_if_engine_luatex:F {\msg_fatal:nn{tagpax}{luatex-required}}
\pdfmanagement_if_active:F {\msg_warning:nn{tagpax}{metadata-required}}
\seq_new:N \l__tagpax_headings_seq
\tl_new:N \l__tagpax_toc_depth_tl
\tl_new:N \l__tagpax_bookmark_depth_tl
\int_new:N \l__tagpax_toc_depth_int
\int_new:N \l__tagpax_bookmark_depth_int
\tl_new:N \l__tagpax_ir_tl
\tl_new:N \l__tagpax_file_tl
\tl_new:N \l__tagpax_pagecommand_tl
\tl_new:N \l__tagpax_import_id_tl
\tl_new:N \l__tagpax_import_stream_key_tl
\int_new:N \g__tagpax_import_int
\prop_new:N \g__tagpax_heading_map_prop
\prop_gput_from_keyval:Nn \g__tagpax_heading_map_prop {H2=chapter,H3=section,H4=subsection,H5=subsubsection,H6=paragraph}
\keys_define:nn {tagpax/setup}{
  toc-depth .code:n={
    \tl_set:Nn\l__tagpax_toc_depth_tl{#1}
    \int_set:Nn\l__tagpax_toc_depth_int{\tl_tail:n{#1}}
  },
  bookmark-depth .code:n={
    \tl_set:Nn\l__tagpax_bookmark_depth_tl{#1}
    \int_set:Nn\l__tagpax_bookmark_depth_int{\tl_tail:n{#1}}
  },
  heading-map .code:n=\prop_gput_from_keyval:Nn \g__tagpax_heading_map_prop {#1},
}
\keys_set:nn {tagpax/setup}{toc-depth=H4,bookmark-depth=H5}
\NewDocumentCommand\tagpaxsetup{m}{\keys_set:nn{tagpax/setup}{#1}}
\cs_new_protected:Npn \tagpax_heading_record:nnnn #1#2#3#4 {\seq_put_right:Nn\l__tagpax_headings_seq{{#1}{#2}{#3}{#4}}}
\cs_new:Npn \__tagpax_heading_num:n #1 {\tl_tail:n{#1}}
\cs_new_protected:Npn \__tagpax_build_addtotoc:N #1 {
  \tl_clear:N #1
  \seq_map_inline:Nn \l__tagpax_headings_seq {
    \__tagpax_build_addtotoc_aux:nnnnN ##1 #1
  }
}
\cs_new_protected:Npn \__tagpax_build_addtotoc_aux:nnnnN #1#2#3#4#5 {
  \int_compare:nNnT
    {\__tagpax_heading_num:n{#1}}
    <
    {\l__tagpax_toc_depth_int+1} {
    \prop_get:NnNT \g__tagpax_heading_map_prop {#1}\l_tmpa_tl {
      \tl_if_empty:NF #5 {\tl_put_right:Nn #5 {,}}
      \tl_put_right:Ne #5 {#2,\l_tmpa_tl,{\exp_not:n{#4}},tagpax.#3}
    }
  }
}
\keys_define:nn {tagpax/include}{
  ir .tl_set:N=\l__tagpax_ir_tl,
  toc-depth .code:n={
    \tl_set:Nn\l__tagpax_toc_depth_tl{#1}
    \int_set:Nn\l__tagpax_toc_depth_int{\tl_tail:n{#1}}
  },
  bookmark-depth .code:n={
    \tl_set:Nn\l__tagpax_bookmark_depth_tl{#1}
    \int_set:Nn\l__tagpax_bookmark_depth_int{\tl_tail:n{#1}}
  },
  pagecommand .tl_set:N=\l__tagpax_pagecommand_tl,
}
\msg_new:nnn {tagpax}{deprecated-command}
  {Command~\token_to_str:N #1~is~deprecated;~use~\token_to_str:N #2~instead.}
\NewDocumentCommand\tagpaxextract{O{}m}{
  \directlua{local m=require('tagpax'); m.extract([[#2]], [[#1]]~='' and [[#1]] or nil)}
}
\NewDocumentCommand\TagPaxExtract{O{}m}{
  \msg_warning:nnnn {tagpax}{deprecated-command}
    {\TagPaxExtract}{\tagpaxextract}
  \tagpaxextract[#1]{#2}
}
\NewDocumentCommand\tagpaxinclude{O{}m}{
  \group_begin:
  \int_gincr:N \g__tagpax_import_int
  \tl_set:Ne \l__tagpax_import_id_tl {\int_use:N\g__tagpax_import_int}
  \tl_set:Nn \l__tagpax_file_tl {#2}
  \tl_set:Nn \l__tagpax_ir_tl {#2}
  \regex_replace_once:nnN { \.pdf\Z } {.tagpax} \l__tagpax_ir_tl
  \tl_clear:N \l__tagpax_pagecommand_tl
  \keys_set:nn {tagpax/include}{#1}
  \directlua{require('tagpax-backend').emit_reservations(
    [[\luaescapestring{\l__tagpax_ir_tl}]])}
  \directlua{require('tagpax-native').emit_page_imports(
    [[\luaescapestring{#2}]],[[\luaescapestring{\l__tagpax_ir_tl}]],
    [[\luaescapestring{\l__tagpax_import_id_tl}]])}
  \directlua{require('tagpax-backend').emit_bindings(
    [[\luaescapestring{\l__tagpax_ir_tl}]])}
  \group_end:
}

\NewDocumentCommand\tagpaxroundtripinclude{O{}m}
  {\tagpaxinclude[#1]{#2}}

% The migration alias is deliberately part of tagpax rather than a second
% package: it cannot accidentally become another page-import implementation.
\msg_new:nnn {tagpax}{pdfpages-pages}
  {The~tagpax~pdfpages~compatibility~option~supports~only~pages=-.}
\msg_new:nnn {tagpax}{pdfpages-option}
  {The~pdfpages~option~'#1'~is~not~supported~by~the~native~tagpax~importer.}
\msg_new:nnn {tagpax}{pdfpages-conflict}
  {
    The~tagpax~pdfpages~compatibility~option~cannot~be~used~with~the~real~
    pdfpages~package.~The~compatibility~\string\includepdf~is~disabled;~
    use~\string\tagpaxinclude~for~semantic~imports.
  }
\msg_new:nnn {tagpax}{includepdf-defined}
  {
    Command~\string\includepdf~already~exists.~The~tagpax~pdfpages~
    compatibility~option~is~disabled;~use~\string\tagpaxinclude.
  }
\tl_new:N \l__tagpax_pdfpages_pages_tl
\tl_new:N \l__tagpax_pdfpages_pagecommand_tl
\keys_define:nn {tagpax/pdfpages}
  {
    pages .tl_set:N = \l__tagpax_pdfpages_pages_tl,
    pagecommand .tl_set:N = \l__tagpax_pdfpages_pagecommand_tl,
    nup .code:n = \msg_error:nnn {tagpax}{pdfpages-option}{nup},
    booklet .code:n = \msg_error:nnn {tagpax}{pdfpages-option}{booklet},
    signature .code:n = \msg_error:nnn {tagpax}{pdfpages-option}{signature},
  }

\cs_new_protected:Npn \__tagpax_includepdf:nn #1#2
  {
    \group_begin:
      \tl_set:Nn \l__tagpax_pdfpages_pages_tl {-}
      \tl_clear:N \l__tagpax_pdfpages_pagecommand_tl
      \keys_set:nn {tagpax/pdfpages} {#1}
      \str_if_eq:VnF \l__tagpax_pdfpages_pages_tl {-}
        {\msg_error:nn {tagpax}{pdfpages-pages}}
      \tagpaxinclude
        [pagecommand=\l__tagpax_pdfpages_pagecommand_tl] {#2}
    \group_end:
  }

\cs_new_protected:Npn \__tagpax_disable_includepdf:
  {
    \bool_if:NT \g__tagpax_pdfpages_compat_bool
      {
        \msg_warning:nn {tagpax}{pdfpages-conflict}
        \cs_undefine:N \includepdf
        \bool_gset_false:N \g__tagpax_pdfpages_compat_bool
      }
  }

\bool_if:NT \g__tagpax_pdfpages_compat_bool
  {
    \IfPackageLoadedTF {pdfpages}
      {
        \msg_warning:nn {tagpax}{pdfpages-conflict}
        \bool_gset_false:N \g__tagpax_pdfpages_compat_bool
      }
      {
        \cs_if_exist:NTF \includepdf
          {
            \msg_warning:nn {tagpax}{includepdf-defined}
            \bool_gset_false:N \g__tagpax_pdfpages_compat_bool
          }
          {
            \NewDocumentCommand \includepdf { O{} m }
              { \__tagpax_includepdf:nn {#1}{#2} }
            % If pdfpages is loaded later, release the public command before
            % that package defines its own version and retain only tagpax's
            % unambiguous native interface.
            \AddToHook {package/pdfpages/before}
              { \__tagpax_disable_includepdf: }
          }
      }
  }
\ExplSyntaxOff
%</package>
%<*tagpdf-bridge>
\NeedsTeXFormat{LaTeX2e}[2024-11-01]
\ProvidesExplPackage{tagpax-tagpdf-bridge}
{2026/07/23}
{v0.8.5-dev}
{Non-stack tagpdf bridge for tagpax}
\ExplSyntaxOn
\msg_new:nnn {tagpax}{bridge-incompatible}
  {The~installed~tagpdf~does~not~provide~the~internals~required~by~the~tagpax~bridge.}
\msg_new:nnn {tagpax}{bridge-stream-unknown}
  {External~stream~'#1'~has~not~been~allocated.}
\msg_new:nnn {tagpax}{bridge-stream-committed}
  {External~stream~'#1'~has~already~been~committed.}
\cs_if_exist:NF \__tag_struct_prop_gput:nnn
  { \msg_fatal:nn {tagpax}{bridge-incompatible} }
\prop_new:N \g__tagpax_bridge_stream_key_prop
\prop_new:N \g__tagpax_bridge_stream_committed_prop
\cs_generate_variant:Nn \prop_gput:Nnn { cee, Nee }
\seq_new:N  \g__tagpax_bridge_stream_seq
\tl_new:N   \l__tagpax_bridge_role_ns_tl
\tl_new:N   \l__tagpax_bridge_role_tag_tl
\tl_new:N   \l__tagpax_bridge_role_ns_resolved_tl
\int_new:N  \l__tagpax_bridge_max_mcid_int
\tl_new:N   \l__tagpax_bridge_parenttree_tl
\tl_new:N   \l__tagpax_bridge_stream_key_tl

\cs_new_protected:Npn \tagpax_tag_struct_new:nnN #1#2#3
  {
    \int_gincr:N \c@g__tag_struct_abs_int
    \tl_set:Ne #3 { \int_use:N \c@g__tag_struct_abs_int }
    \__tag_prop_new:c { g__tag_struct_\tl_use:N #3 _prop }
    \__tag_seq_new:c { g__tag_struct_kids_\tl_use:N #3 _seq }
    \pdf_object_new_indexed:nn { __tag/struct } { \tl_use:N #3 }
    \__tag_struct_prop_gput:nne { \tl_use:N #3 } { Type } { /StructElem }
    \pdf_version_compare:NnTF < {2.0}
      { \tl_set:Nn \l__tagpax_bridge_role_ns_tl {pdf} }
      { \tl_set:Nn \l__tagpax_bridge_role_ns_tl {pdf2} }
    \__tag_role_get:nnNN
      {#1}
      {\l__tagpax_bridge_role_ns_tl}
      \l__tagpax_bridge_role_tag_tl
      \l__tagpax_bridge_role_ns_resolved_tl
    \tl_if_empty:NT \l__tagpax_bridge_role_tag_tl
      { \tl_set:Nn \l__tagpax_bridge_role_tag_tl {#1} }
    \tl_if_empty:NT \l__tagpax_bridge_role_ns_resolved_tl
      { \tl_set_eq:NN \l__tagpax_bridge_role_ns_resolved_tl \l__tagpax_bridge_role_ns_tl }
    \__tag_struct_set_tag_info:eoo
      { \tl_use:N #3 }
      { \l__tagpax_bridge_role_tag_tl }
      { \l__tagpax_bridge_role_ns_resolved_tl }
    \__tag_struct_prop_gput:nne
      { \tl_use:N #3 }
      { rolemap }
      { {\l__tagpax_bridge_role_tag_tl}{\l__tagpax_bridge_role_ns_resolved_tl} }
    \__tag_struct_prop_gput:nne
      { \tl_use:N #3 }
      { parentrole }
      { {\l__tagpax_bridge_role_tag_tl}{\l__tagpax_bridge_role_ns_resolved_tl} }
    \__tag_struct_prop_gput:nne
      { \tl_use:N #3 }
      { parentnum }
      {#2}
    \__tag_struct_kid_struct_gput_right:ee {#2} {\tl_use:N #3}
  }

\cs_new_protected:Npn \tagpax_tag_struct_append_mcr:nnn #1#2#3
  {
    \__tag_seq_gput_right:ce
      { g__tag_struct_kids_#1_seq }
      {
        <<
          /Type~/MCR
          /Stm~#2
          /MCID~\int_eval:n{#3}
        >>
      }
  }

\cs_new_protected:Npn \tagpax_tag_stream_new:nN #1#2
  {
    \prop_if_in:NnTF \g__tagpax_bridge_stream_key_prop {#1}
      { \prop_get:NnN \g__tagpax_bridge_stream_key_prop {#1} #2 }
      {
        \int_gincr:N \c@g__tag_parenttree_obj_int
        \tl_set:Ne #2 { \int_use:N \c@g__tag_parenttree_obj_int }
        \prop_gput:NnV \g__tagpax_bridge_stream_key_prop {#1} #2
        \prop_new:c { g__tagpax_bridge_stream_\tl_use:N #2 _prop }
        \seq_gput_right:Nn \g__tagpax_bridge_stream_seq {#1}
      }
  }

\cs_new:Npn \tagpax_tag_stream_structparents:n #1
  { \prop_item:Nn \g__tagpax_bridge_stream_key_prop {#1} }

\cs_new:Npn \tagpax_tag_stream_attr:n #1
  { /StructParents~\tagpax_tag_stream_structparents:n {#1} }

\cs_new_protected:Npn \tagpax_tag_stream_register:nnn #1#2#3
  {
    \prop_get:NnNTF \g__tagpax_bridge_stream_key_prop {#1} \l__tagpax_bridge_stream_key_tl
      {
        \prop_gput:cee
          { g__tagpax_bridge_stream_\l__tagpax_bridge_stream_key_tl _prop }
          { \int_eval:n {#2} }
          {#3}
      }
      { \msg_error:nnn {tagpax}{bridge-stream-unknown}{#1} }
  }

\cs_new_protected:Npn \tagpax_tag_stream_commit:n #1
  {
    \prop_if_in:NnTF \g__tagpax_bridge_stream_committed_prop {#1}
      { \msg_warning:nnn {tagpax}{bridge-stream-committed}{#1} }
      {
        \prop_get:NnNTF \g__tagpax_bridge_stream_key_prop {#1} \l_tmpa_tl
          {
            \int_set:Nn \l__tagpax_bridge_max_mcid_int {-1}
            \prop_map_inline:cn { g__tagpax_bridge_stream_\l_tmpa_tl _prop }
              {
                \int_set:Nn \l__tagpax_bridge_max_mcid_int
                  { \int_max:nn {\l__tagpax_bridge_max_mcid_int}{##1} }
              }
            \tl_clear:N \l__tagpax_bridge_parenttree_tl
            \int_step_inline:nnnn {0}{1}{\l__tagpax_bridge_max_mcid_int}
              {
                \prop_get:cnNTF
                  { g__tagpax_bridge_stream_\l_tmpa_tl _prop }
                  {##1}
                  \l_tmpb_tl
                  {
                    \tl_put_right:Ne \l__tagpax_bridge_parenttree_tl
                      { \pdf_object_ref_indexed:nn {__tag/struct}{\l_tmpb_tl}~ }
                  }
                  { \tl_put_right:Nn \l__tagpax_bridge_parenttree_tl { null~ } }
              }
            \tl_gput_right:Ne \g__tag_parenttree_objr_tl
              {
                \l_tmpa_tl~[~\l__tagpax_bridge_parenttree_tl]^^J
              }
            \prop_gput:Nnn \g__tagpax_bridge_stream_committed_prop {#1} {true}
          }
          { \msg_error:nnn {tagpax}{bridge-stream-unknown}{#1} }
      }
  }


\prop_new:N \g__tagpax_backend_node_prop
\prop_new:N \g__tagpax_backend_form_prop
\prop_new:N \g__tagpax_backend_page_stream_prop
\prop_new:N \g__tagpax_backend_objr_prop
\tl_new:N   \g__tagpax_backend_wrapper_tl
\tl_new:N   \l__tagpax_backend_annotation_tl
\tl_new:N   \l__tagpax_backend_annotation_parent_tl
\tl_new:N   \l__tagpax_backend_annotation_action_tl
\tl_new:N   \l__tagpax_backend_annotation_key_tl

\cs_new_protected:Npn \TagPaxBackendForm #1#2#3
  {
    \prop_gput:Nnn \g__tagpax_backend_form_prop {#1} {#2}
    \prop_gput:Nnn \g__tagpax_backend_page_stream_prop {#1} {#3}
  }

\cs_new_protected:Npn \TagPaxPageDestination #1#2
  { \pdf_destination:nn {#1}{#2} }

\cs_new_protected:Npn \TagPaxPointDestination #1#2#3#4#5
  {
    \kern-\dim_eval:n{#1sp}
    \hbox_to_wd:nn {#1sp}
      {
        \kern#2sp
        \raise#3sp\hbox{\pdf_destination:nn {#4}{#5}}
        \hss
      }
  }

\cs_new_protected:Npn \TagPaxRectangleDestination #1#2#3#4#5#6
  {
    \kern-\dim_eval:n{#1sp}
    \hbox_to_wd:nn {#1sp}
      {
        \kern#2sp
        \raise#3sp\hbox
          {\pdf_destination:nnnn {#6}{#4sp}{#5sp}{0pt}}
        \hss
      }
  }

\cs_new_protected:Npn \TagPaxNavigationHeading #1#2#3
  {
    \int_compare:nNnT
      {\__tagpax_heading_num:n{#1}}
      <
      {\l__tagpax_toc_depth_int+1}
      {
        \prop_get:NnNT \g__tagpax_heading_map_prop {#1}\l_tmpa_tl
          {
            \group_begin:
              \cs_if_exist:NT \@currentHref {\tl_set:Nn\@currentHref{#3}}
              \addcontentsline{toc}{\l_tmpa_tl}{#2}
            \group_end:
          }
      }
    \int_compare:nNnT
      {\__tagpax_heading_num:n{#1}}
      <
      {\l__tagpax_bookmark_depth_int+1}
      {
        \cs_if_exist:NT \bookmark
          {
            \bookmark[
              level=\int_eval:n{\__tagpax_heading_num:n{#1}-2},
              dest={#3}
            ]{#2}
          }
      }
  }

\NewTaggingSocketPlug{link/before}{tagpax-import}
  {
    \pdfannot_dict_put:nne
      {link/\l__tagpax_backend_annotation_action_tl}
      {StructParent}
      {\l__tagpax_backend_annotation_key_tl}
  }
\NewTaggingSocketPlug{link/after}{tagpax-import}
  {
    \__tag_property_record:en
      {@tagpax@objr@page@\l__tagpax_backend_annotation_key_tl}
      {tagabspage}
    \pdf_object_unnamed_write:ne {dict}
      {
        /Type/OBJR
        /Obj~\pdfannot_link_ref_last:
        /Pg~\pdf_pageobject_ref:n
          {
            \property_ref:enn
              {@tagpax@objr@page@\l__tagpax_backend_annotation_key_tl}
              {tagabspage}{1}
          }
      }
    \prop_gput:Nee \g__tagpax_backend_objr_prop
      {\l__tagpax_backend_annotation_tl}
      {\pdf_object_ref_last:}
    \__tag_parenttree_add_objr:nn
      {\l__tagpax_backend_annotation_key_tl}
      {
        \pdf_object_ref_indexed:nn
          {__tag/struct}{\l__tagpax_backend_annotation_parent_tl}
      }
    \int_gincr:N \c@g__tag_parenttree_obj_int
  }

\cs_new_protected:Npn \__tagpax_annotation_begin:nn #1#2
  {
    \tl_set:Nn \l__tagpax_backend_annotation_tl {#1}
    \tl_set:Nn \l__tagpax_backend_annotation_action_tl {#2}
    \prop_get:NnN \g__tagpax_backend_annotation_parent_prop
      {#1}\l__tagpax_backend_annotation_parent_tl
    \tl_set:Ne \l__tagpax_backend_annotation_key_tl
      {\int_use:N \c@g__tag_parenttree_obj_int}
    % The Lua link-splitting callback associates annotations from the current
    % structure attribute.  Imported links already have an explicit source
    % parent and are bound by the plugs below, so make the callback ignore
    % these nodes; otherwise it creates a second OBJR in tagpdf's link bin.
    \lua_now:n
      {tex.setattribute(luatexbase.attributes.g__tag_structnum_attr,-1)}
    \AssignTaggingSocketPlug{link/before}{tagpax-import}
    \AssignTaggingSocketPlug{link/after}{tagpax-import}
  }

\cs_new_protected:Npn \TagPaxGotoOverlay #1#2#3#4#5#6#7
  {
    \group_begin:
      \__tagpax_annotation_begin:nn {#6}{GoTo}
      \kern-\dim_eval:n{#1sp}
      \hbox_to_wd:nn {#1sp}
        {
          \kern#2sp
          \raise#3sp\hbox
            {
              \pdfannot_link_goto_begin:nw {#7}
                \hbox_to_wd:nn {#4sp}{\rule{0pt}{#5sp}\hfill}
              \pdfannot_link_goto_end:
            }
          \hss
        }
    \group_end:
  }

\cs_new_protected:Npn \__tagpax_action_overlay:nnnnnnnn #1#2#3#4#5#6#7#8
  {
    \group_begin:
      \__tagpax_annotation_begin:nn {#6}{#7}
      \kern-\dim_eval:n{#1sp}
      \hbox_to_wd:nn {#1sp}
        {
          \kern#2sp
          \raise#3sp\hbox
            {
              \pdfannot_link_begin:nnw {#7}{#8}
                \hbox_to_wd:nn {#4sp}{\rule{0pt}{#5sp}\hfill}
              \pdfannot_link_end:n {#7}
            }
          \hss
        }
    \group_end:
  }

\cs_new_protected:Npn \TagPaxURIOverlay #1#2#3#4#5#6#7
  {
    \__tagpax_action_overlay:nnnnnnnn
      {#1}{#2}{#3}{#4}{#5}{#6}{URI}
      {/A~<</Type~/Action~/S~/URI~/URI~<#7>>>}
  }

\cs_new_protected:Npn \TagPaxGoToRNameOverlay #1#2#3#4#5#6#7#8
  {
    \__tagpax_action_overlay:nnnnnnnn
      {#1}{#2}{#3}{#4}{#5}{#6}{GoToR}
      {/A~<</Type~/Action~/S~/GoToR~/F~<#7>~/D~<#8>>>}
  }

\cs_new_protected:Npn \TagPaxGoToRPageOverlay #1#2#3#4#5#6#7#8#9
  {
    \__tagpax_action_overlay:nnnnnnnn
      {#1}{#2}{#3}{#4}{#5}{#6}{GoToR}
      {/A~<</Type~/Action~/S~/GoToR~/F~<#7>~/D~[#8~/#9]>>}
  }

\cs_new_protected:Npn \TagPaxImportOnePage #1#2#3#4#5
  {
    \tagpax_tag_stream_new:nN {#3} \l__tagpax_import_stream_key_tl
    \clearpage
    \thispagestyle{empty}
    \tl_use:N \l__tagpax_pagecommand_tl
    \directlua{require('tagpax-native').emit_page_navigation(
      [[\luaescapestring{#4}]],#2,[[\luaescapestring{#5}]])}
    \noindent\hbox to \linewidth
      {\hss\directlua{require('tagpax-luatex').write_page(
        [[\luaescapestring{#1}]],#2,\l__tagpax_import_stream_key_tl,[[\luaescapestring{#3}]],
        [[\luaescapestring{#4}]],[[\luaescapestring{#5}]],
        \number\textwidth,\number\textheight)}\hss}
    \clearpage
  }

\cs_new_protected:Npn \TagPaxBackendDocumentBegin
  {
    \prop_gclear:N \g__tagpax_backend_node_prop
    \prop_gclear:N \g__tagpax_backend_objr_prop
    \prop_gclear:N \g__tagpax_backend_annotation_parent_prop
    \tl_set_eq:NN \l_tmpa_tl \g__tag_struct_stack_current_tl
    \tagpax_tag_struct_new:nnN {Part}{\l_tmpa_tl}\g__tagpax_backend_wrapper_tl
    \prop_gput:NnV \g__tagpax_backend_node_prop {@wrapper}\g__tagpax_backend_wrapper_tl
  }
\cs_new_protected:Npn \TagPaxBackendDocumentEnd
  {
    \seq_map_inline:Nn \g__tagpax_bridge_stream_seq
      { \tagpax_tag_stream_commit:n {##1} }
  }
\cs_new_protected:Npn \TagPaxBackendNode #1#2#3
  {
    \prop_get:NnN \g__tagpax_backend_node_prop {#3}\l_tmpa_tl
    \tagpax_tag_struct_new:nnN {#2}{\l_tmpa_tl}\l_tmpb_tl
    \prop_gput:NnV \g__tagpax_backend_node_prop {#1}\l_tmpb_tl
  }
\prop_new:N \g__tagpax_backend_annotation_parent_prop
\cs_new:Npn \__tagpax_backend_form_ref:n #1
  { \prop_item:Nn \g__tagpax_backend_form_prop {#1} }
\cs_new:Npn \__tagpax_backend_objr_ref:n #1
  { \prop_item:Nn \g__tagpax_backend_objr_prop {#1} }
\cs_new_protected:Npn \TagPaxBackendReserveMCR #1#2#3#4#5
  {
    \prop_get:NnN \g__tagpax_backend_node_prop {#5}\l_tmpa_tl
    \__tag_seq_gput_right:cn {g__tag_struct_kids_\l_tmpa_tl _seq}
      {
        <</Type~/MCR/MCID~\int_eval:n{#3}
          /Stm~\__tagpax_backend_form_ref:n{#2}>>
      }
  }
\cs_new_protected:Npn \TagPaxBackendBindMCR #1#2#3#4#5
  {
    \prop_get:NnN \g__tagpax_backend_node_prop {#5}\l_tmpa_tl
    \exp_args:NnnV \tagpax_tag_stream_register:nnn {#4}{#3}\l_tmpa_tl
  }
\cs_new_protected:Npn \TagPaxBackendReserveOBJR #1#2
  {
    \prop_get:NnN \g__tagpax_backend_node_prop {#2}\l_tmpa_tl
    \prop_gput:NnV \g__tagpax_backend_annotation_parent_prop {#1}\l_tmpa_tl
    \__tag_seq_gput_right:cn {g__tag_struct_kids_\l_tmpa_tl _seq}
      {\__tagpax_backend_objr_ref:n{#1}}
  }
\cs_new_protected:Npn \TagPaxBackendUnsupportedStream #1#2
  { \msg_error:nnn {tagpax}{bridge-stream-unknown}{#1} }

%</tagpdf-bridge>
